RESEARCH ARTICLE                           A Framework for Pore‐Scale Simulation of Effective
10.1029/2020JB020515
                                           Electrical Conductivity and Permittivity
Key Points:
• A framework is developed for the
                                           of Porous Media in the Frequency
  pore‐scale numerical simulation of
  broadband effective electrical
                                           Range From 1 mHz to 1 GHz
  properties of porous media
• Both the interfacial polarization and
                                           Qifei Niu1     , Chi Zhang2      , and Manika Prasad3
  the electrochemical polarizations        1
  are considered in the simulation
                                            Department of Geosciences, Boise State University, Boise, ID, USA, 2Department of Geology, The University of Kansas,
• A Berea sandstone sample is utilized     Lawrence, KS, USA, 3Department of Geophysics, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO, USA
  to demonstrate the use of the
  framework
                                           Abstract Geoelectrical methods are broadly used in earth sciences for various purposes. To correctly
Supporting Information:                    interpret ﬁeld geoelectrical data, it is essential to have a mechanistic understanding of the effective
• Supporting Information S1
                                           electrical conductivity and permittivity of geological materials over a broad frequency range. Recently, the
                                           pore‐scale numerical simulation, which utilizes the digital microstructural images of the material, has
                                           become a powerful tool in studying the effective electrical properties of geological media. However, it is still
Correspondence to:
Q. Niu,                                    difﬁcult to incorporate surface‐related electrochemical processes in a pore‐scale simulation. In this study,
qifeiniu@boisestate.edu                    we develop a general framework to consider these electrochemical processes in pore‐scale simulations,
                                           which enable the calculation of broadband effective electrical conductivity and permittivity of porous
Citation:                                  geological media. A Berea sandstone sample is utilized to demonstrate the use of the proposed framework.
Niu, Q., Zhang, C., & Prasad, M. (2020).   Laboratory experiments of the effective electrical conductivity and permittivity of the sample in the
A framework for pore‐scale simulation
                                           frequency range from 10−3 to 109 Hz provided valuable measurement data for validating the simulation. The
of effective electrical conductivity and
permittivity of porous media in the        good agreement between our simulated spectra and the experimental data provides validation for the
frequency range from 1 mHz to 1 GHz.       numerical simulation to reproduce the variations in the effective electrical conductivity and permittivity of
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
                                           porous geological materials induced by both the electrochemical polarizations and the interfacial
Earth, 125, e2020JB020515. https://doi.
org/10.1029/2020JB020515                   polarization. This work thus provides a useful tool for studying the effective electrical properties of porous
                                           geological materials featuring complex microstructures.
Received 7 JUL 2020
Accepted 2 OCT 2020
Accepted article online 5 OCT 2020
                                           1. Introduction
                                           Geoelectrical methods are frequently used in earth sciences to study the physical properties and processes of
                                           the solid earth (e.g., Kneisel et al., 2008; Knight, 2001; Revil, Karaoulis, et al., 2012; Streich, 2016; Unsworth
                                           et al., 2004). Relevant techniques include the electrical resistivity method (Loke et al., 2013), electromagnetic
                                           method (Constable, 2010), induced polarization (Kemna et al., 2012), capacitive resistivity method
                                           (Kuras et al., 2006), and ground‐penetrating radar (Annan, 2005). Such geoelectrical tests provide spatial
                                           and/or temporal distribution of the electrical conductivity and/or permittivity of the subsurface. To correctly
                                           interpret the geoelectrical measurements, one needs to have a mechanistic understanding of the electrical
                                           conduction and polarization in geological materials and their controlling factors such as material micro-
                                           structure and environmental conditions (e.g., Santamarina et al., 2001).
                                           The electrical conductivity quantiﬁes a material's ability to conduct electric current. For nonmetallic miner-
                                           als (e.g., quartz), the conductivity is in the order of 10−10 S m−1 (e.g., Telford et al., 1990), and thus, the solid
                                           phase of geological materials is usually considered nonconductive. Pore water in geological materials is con-
                                           ductive due to the electromigration of dissolved ions, and it constitutes the major pathway for the electrical
                                           conduction in geological materials. In addition to pore water, the electrical double layer (EDL) forming at
                                           the mineral‐water interface also conducts electric current (Revil & Glover, 1998), especially in clayey soils
                                           and rocks.
                                           The electrical permittivity is associated with a material's ability to store energy (i.e., polarization). The permit-
                                           tivity of water and nonmetallic minerals is usually constant at frequencies lower than ~GHz. The effective
                                           permittivity of water‐saturated geological materials, however, is frequency dependent and may deviate
©2020. American Geophysical Union.         signiﬁcantly from the volume‐averaged permittivity of its individual phases. As the frequency decreases,
All Rights Reserved.                       the effective permittivity of a geological material generally increases due to the contribution of some pore


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                              1 of 18
                                                                                                                                        21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                             10.1029/2020JB020515



                   or subpore‐scale polarizations (e.g., Santamarina et al., 2001). For porous media, several polarization
                   mechanisms have been proposed to explain the frequency‐dependent effective electrical permittivity, includ-
                   ing the interfacial polarization (Hanai, 1960) and some electrochemical polarizations (see Chelidze &
                   Gueguen, 1999), both of which will be reviewed in section 2.
                   In principle, the frequency variations in electrical conductivity and permittivity of a material are linked to
                   each other by the principles of causality. Consider a material featuring a spectrum of relaxation times
                   (i.e., characteristic time of polarizations). As the frequency of external electric ﬁeld decreases, the polariza-
                   tion with larger relaxation times will occur and also contribute to energy storage in the material. This means
                   more energy will be stored from the external ﬁeld at a lower frequency (i.e., permittivity increases as the fre-
                   quency decreases). Since the induced electric ﬁeld in the material during the polarization has a direction
                   opposite to the external electric ﬁeld, it becomes more difﬁcult for the electric current passing through the
                   material (i.e., the electrical conductivity decreases) if compared to a higher frequency. The causality between
                   both properties means when the electrical permittivity spectrum of a material is known, the electrical con-
                   ductivity spectrum can be determined accordingly and vice versa. Mathematically, the frequency‐dependent
                   conductivity and permittivity can be linked to each other through the Kramers‐Kronig relations (e.g., Milton
                   et al., 1997; Volkmann & Klitzsch, 2015).
                   To study the effective electrical properties of geological materials, the most commonly used approaches are
                   laboratory experiment and theoretical modeling. In the past several decades, these two approaches have been
                   extensively used to develop robust models that can translate measured effective electrical conductivity and
                   permittivity to other physical properties of interest such as porosity and water content (e.g., Lesmes &
                   Friedman, 2005). The most popular model is probably Archie's law (Archie, 1942), which relates the effective
                   electrical conductivity of a porous medium to the pore water conductivity through a power function of the
                   porosity (saturated condition) or volumetric water content (unsaturated condition). Other examples include
                   the differential effective medium theory‐based conductivity models (e.g., Sheng, 1990; Sheng & Callegari,
                   1984) and the empirical Topp's equation (Topp et al., 1980) for high‐frequency permittivity (or dielectric per-
                   mittivity). Recently, signiﬁcant progress has been made to model the inﬂuence of EDL on electrical conduc-
                   tion and polarization in porous media (e.g., see Bairlein et al., 2016; Revil, 2012, 2013; Weller & Slater, 2012).
                   The effective electrical conductivity and permittivity of geological media are inﬂuenced by the material's
                   microstructure (i.e., texture and fabric). While the effect of material texture (e.g., particle/pore size and dis-
                   tribution) has been extensively studied (e.g., Jones & Friedman, 2000), the inﬂuence of material fabric (e.g.,
                   particle/pore arrangement and orientation) is less explored due to the difﬁculty of determining
                   microstructural parameters of geological materials. Recently, the pore‐scale numerical simulation has
                   emerged as a powerful tool in studying effective properties of soils and rocks (Andrä et al., 2013a, 2013b).
                   In a pore‐scale simulation, both microscopic and macroscopic (i.e., effective) properties of the material
                   can be calculated based on the digital microstructural images. Such pore‐scale simulations allow us to
                   explore potential relationships between microstructure and effective properties of the material. In addition
                   to pore‐scale imaging techniques (e.g., μCT scan or scanning electron microscope; Blunt et al., 2013),
                   numerical experiments such as the discrete element method (Cundall & Strack, 1979) can also be used to
                   generate the digital microstructural images (e.g., Niu et al., 2017; Niu & Zhang, 2018a), opening another
                   way to study microstructural effect on effective electrical properties of geological materials.
                   Although the pore‐scale simulation has been used to study the effective dc conductivity (e.g., Zhan
                   et al., 2010) or high‐frequency permittivity (dielectric permittivity) (e.g., Han & Yang, 2018) of porous geolo-
                   gical materials, it is still challenging to apply it to studying the electrochemical polarization‐induced conduc-
                   tivity/permittivity variations. This is because electrochemical polarizations in porous media are associated
                   with the ion migration and diffusion occurring in a very thin layer (typically from several to tens of nan-
                   ometers) near the mineral‐water interface. A direct simulation of these processes (e.g., Bücker et al., 2019)
                   requires a ﬁne discretization of the sample domain near the mineral‐water interface. Considering that the
                   sample volume in a pore‐scale simulation is relatively large, ~mm3, the computational cost of a direct simu-
                   lation is extremely high. It is therefore desirable to develop new methods that can effectively include electro-
                   chemical polarizations in pore‐scale simulations.
                   The objective of this study is to develop such a framework for pore‐scale simulations of the broadband effec-
                   tive electrical properties of porous media. For simplicity, in this study, we only consider water‐saturated


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                   2 of 18
                                                                                                                                         21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                              10.1029/2020JB020515



                   porous geological media made of nonmetallic minerals. In the following, we ﬁrst review the theoretical
                   background of electrical conduction and polarization in water‐saturated porous media. We then develop
                   the framework for incorporating various electrical polarizations in the pore‐scale simulation, including
                   interfacial polarization, membrane polarization, and grain/pore polarization. Finally, we demonstrate the
                   use of our proposed framework by applying it to a Berea sandstone sample.

                   2. Theoretical Background
                   2.1. General Deﬁnition and Terminology
                   In this paper, we use the electrical conductivity and electrical permittivity to describe the electrical properties
                   of a material at a given frequency. Note that the material here can be either a single‐phase material
                   (e.g., water) or a composite. Other parameters (such as dc conductivity, dielectric permittivity, complex con-
                   ductivity, and complex permittivity) have also been seen in geoscience literatures. To avoid confusion, in the
                   following, we deﬁne the electric conductivity and electrical permittivity through the constitutive equations in
                   electromagnetic theory. For composites such as a geological material, the measured electrical properties are
                   essentially average properties of its individual phases (e.g., Torquato, 2013). To distinguish the average
                   properties from the property of individual phases, in this paper, we use the effective electrical conductivity
                   and effective electrical permittivity to indicate the average (or measured) properties of geological materials.
                   Assume that a time‐varying electric ﬁeld E is applied to a material. The induced total current density in the
                   material Jt is then the sum of the conduction current density Jc and the displacement current density Jd,
                   expressed as

                                                                     Jt ¼ Jc þ Jd :                                                (1)

                   The conduction current density Jc is related to the applied electric ﬁeld E and the dc electrical conductivity
                   σdc by Ohm's law,

                                                                      Jc ¼ σ dc E:                                                 (2)

                   The displacement current density Jd is deﬁned as the derivative of the electric displacement ﬁeld D respec-
                   tive to time t,

                                                                      Jd ¼ ∂D=∂t:                                                  (3)

                   Note that the electrical displacement ﬁeld D is related to the electric ﬁeld E by

                                                                       D ¼ ε∗d E;                                                  (4)

                   where ε∗d ¼ ε′d − iε′′d (i being the imaginary number) is the complex permittivity of the material excluding
                   ohmic losses. Inserting Equation 4 into Equation 3 and considering the sinusoidal electric ﬁeld
                   E = E0exp(iωt) yield

                                                                      Jd ¼ iωε∗d E;                                                (5)

                   where the angular frequency ω is equal to 2πf (f being the frequency of the external electric ﬁeld E).
                   Combining Equations 1, 2, and 5 results in
                                                                                  
                                                                  Jt ¼ σ dc þ iωε∗d E:                                             (6)

                   If we deﬁne the complex conductivity σ∗ with the equation Jt = σ∗E, we then have

                                                       σ ∗ ¼ σ′ þ iσ′′ ¼ ðσ dc þ ωε′′d Þ þ iωε′d ;                                 (7)


                   where σ ′ ¼ σ dc þ ε′′d is the real conductivity and σ ′′ ¼ ωε′d is the imaginary conductivity of the material.
                   Similarly, if we deﬁne complex permittivity with the equation Jt = iωε∗E, we will have


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                    3 of 18
                                                                                                                                         21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                              10.1029/2020JB020515



                                                        ε∗ ¼ ε′ − iε′′ ¼ ε′d − iðε′′d þ σ dc =ωÞ;                                  (8)

                   where ε′ and ε″ are the real and imaginary permittivity of the material, respectively. In this study, electrical
                   conductivity refers to the real conductivity σ′ in Equation 7, and electrical permittivity represents the real
                   permittivity ε′ in Equation 8. For geological materials, the effective electrical conductivity and permittivity
                   are indicated by σ′eff and ε′eff, respectively.

                   2.2. Interfacial Polarization in Heterogeneous Material
                   In heterogeneous materials, the interfacial polarization (or Maxwell‐Wagner polarization, e.g., Olhoeft, 1985)
                   occurs where discontinuity (i.e., interface) separates two phases with different electrical properties. Under an
                   external electric ﬁeld, the induced electric ﬁeld normal to the interface in the two phases must be equal.
                   Because of the mismatch of electrical properties, the current density in the two phases at the interface is dif-
                   ferent, resulting in accumulations of charges at the interface. The induced dipole moment, that is, the inter-
                   facial polarization, gives rise to an enhancement of the bulk permittivity of the material if compared to the
                   volume‐averaged permittivity of individual phases (e.g., Chen & Or, 2006). In saturated porous media, the
                   relaxation frequency and effective permittivity increment of the interfacial polarization are mainly inﬂu-
                   enced by the material microstructure and electrical properties of the ﬂuid phase (Bussian, 1983; Samet
                   et al., 2015). There has been a number of theoretical models developed to account for the effect of interfacial
                   polarization on a material's effective electrical properties, including the pioneering work of Maxwell and
                   Wagner (e.g., see Kremer & Schönhals, 2002) and the differential effective medium theory (e.g., Cosenza
                   et al., 2008; Mendelson & Cohen, 1982; Sen et al., 1981). In a pore‐scale numerical simulation, however, the
                   electrical discontinuity is naturally considered because of the use of real microstructures (e.g., Toumelin &
                   Torres‐Verdín, 2007). Thus, no interfacial polarization models are required in this study.

                   2.3. Electrochemical Polarizations in Geological Materials
                   The surface of many geological minerals is negatively charged due to isomorphous substitutions
                   (McBride, 1989) or the presence of hydroxyl group (Zhuravlev, 2000). If immersed in an electrolyte, some
                   ions in the solution will accumulate at the solid‐liquid interface to balance the negatively charged mineral
                   surface, forming an ionic cloud, that is, the EDL. The standard EDL model (Hartkamp et al., 2018) describes
                   the structure of the ionic cloud as two distinct layers. In the inner layer (Stern layer), the cations are adsorbed
                   onto the mineral surface due to electrostatic force, and they are immobile in relative to the mineral surface.
                   In the outer diffusive layer, ions are considered as point charges, and the Poisson‐Boltzmann equation can be
                   used to describe the distribution of the counterions and electrical potential.
                   The presence of EDL at the solid‐liquid interface can affect both the dc conduction and electrical polariza-
                   tion in porous media. First, because the ion concentration in the EDL is considerably higher than that in
                   the bulk solution, the dc conductivity of the material is enhanced. The conductivity increment, known as
                   the surface conductivity, has been observed in many geological materials, including clays (Revil &
                   Glover, 1998; Rhoades et al., 1976) and even silica sand (Revil et al., 2014). Second, when an external electric
                   ﬁeld is applied, the EDL can inﬂuence the local ion ﬂuxes in the pore space, resulting in an imbalance of
                   cation and anion concentrations at the pore scale. The induced ionic concentration gradient will form an
                   electric dipole moment, and thus, the material is polarized. This polarization is related to electrochemical
                   processes occurring near the solid‐liquid interface and thus is termed as electrochemical polarizations in this
                   paper. Many models have been developed for electrochemical polarizations in porous media (e.g., Bücker &
                   Hördt, 2013a; Leroy et al., 2008). Based on their microstructural assumptions (see supporting information
                   Text S1), these polarization models can be classiﬁed into three groups as shown in Figure 1: grain polariza-
                   tion, pore polarization, and membrane polarization.
                   2.3.1. Grain Polarization
                   The grain polarization model assumes that the solid phase of the material is made of grains with regular
                   shapes (e.g., Figure S1b) and that the polarization occurs around these grains (Figure 1a). At the equilibrium
                   state, the ionic concentration in the EDL around the grain reaches a steady state where the electrostatic force
                   is balanced by the thermal diffusion. After applying an external electric ﬁeld, the ions in and near the EDL
                   will redistribute, and anions (cations) will accumulate on one side and deplete on the other side of the grain.
                   The induced gradient of the ionic concentration imposes an electric dipole moment across the grain, and
                   thus, the electrochemical polarization occurs.


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                    4 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                  21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                            Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                       10.1029/2020JB020515




Figure 1. Schematics demonstrating the electrochemical polarizations in water‐saturated porous geological media due to the presence of electrical double layer
(EDL): (a) grain polarization, (b) pore polarization, and (c) membrane polarization. In the ﬁgures, the dark area represents the solid phase, and the gray area
represents the EDL. The remaining area is the bulk solution.


                                        Using this concept, many theoretical models have been developed. Assuming that the ions in the EDL can
                                        only move tangentially and do not exchange with the bulk solution, Schwarz (1962) developed a Debye type
                                        equation to describe the polarization of a spherical grain immersed in electrolyte (Figure 1a). Gains with
                                        other shapes were also considered in some studies (e.g., see Dukhin & Shilov, 1980). Note that this type of
                                        model is only valid for large grains with a ≫ λ, where λ is the Debye length. A general model is available
                                        for grains with arbitrary sizes (e.g., see Chelidze & Gueguen, 1999). In addition to tangential movement,
                                        the exchange of ions between the thin EDL and bulk solution (i.e., normal movement) has also been treated,
                                        for example, in Fixman (1980).
                                        It is worth addressing that abovementioned models did not distinguish the Stern and diffuse layers. In prac-
                                        tice, however, polarization models only considering the tangential ion movement (e.g., Schwarz, 1962) are
                                        usually termed Stern‐layer polarization models (e.g., Jougnot et al., 2010; Revil, 2012). This is because the
                                        ions in the EDL of the model do not have normal movement, which is similar to the ions in the Stern layer
                                        in a standard EDL model. Similarly, models considering both tangential and normal ion movements are
                                        usually termed diffuse‐layer polarization models (e.g., Lesmes & Morgan, 2001) since the ions in the model
                                        are mobile, similar to that in the diffuse layer in the standard EDL model. Recently, many works have
                                        been done to combine these two types of models into a generalized EDL polarization model (e.g., Bücker
                                        et al., 2019; de Lima & Sharma, 1992; Lesmes & Morgan, 2001; Lyklema et al., 1983; Shilov et al., 2001).


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                             5 of 18
                                                                                                                                          21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                               10.1029/2020JB020515



                   2.3.2. Pore Polarization
                   The pore polarization model (Figure 1b), which is associated with the pore microstructural model
                   (Figure S1c), assumes that the electrochemical polarization occurs in the pores. For porous rocks, it seems
                   more natural to utilize the pore polarization model rather than the grain model. This is because experimen-
                   tal studies have indicated that the relaxation time of geological materials is controlled by the pore (or pore
                   throat) size rather than the grain size (Revil, Koch, & Holliger, 2012; Scott & Barker, 2003). Few theoretical
                   works have been done to model the polarization occurring in a single pore (Niu & Zhang, 2018b). Theoretical
                   equations developed for grains have been used to model the pore polarization by replacing the grain radius
                   with the pore radius (e.g., see Revil et al., 2015), but no physical justiﬁcation is provided for such
                   applications.
                   2.3.3. Membrane Polarization
                   Consider a sequence of capillary tubes as shown in Figure 1c, in which the wide tubes represent large pore
                   node in porous media while the small tube models a narrow pore throat. Based on this microstructure
                   model, the concept of membrane polarization (Marshall & Madden, 1959) can be adopted, and indeed, it
                   was the earliest conceptual model for induced polarization of porous rocks. The narrow pore throat is treated
                   as a cation‐selective zone where the electrical current is mainly carried by cations (i.e., cations have a higher
                   transference number than anions). Under an external electric ﬁeld, cations will accumulate at one end of the
                   narrow pore throat and deﬁcit at the other side, resulting in an electrically neural concentration gradient
                   (Figure 1c). This concentration gradient imposes an electric dipole moment across the pore throat, and thus,
                   the material is polarized.
                   Regarding the origin of the cation selectivity of the narrow pore throat in geological media, Bücker and
                   Hördt (2013a) attribute it to the EDL formed at the solid‐liquid interface. For pore throats with small sizes
                   (e.g., <0.1 μm), the EDL (usually ~nm in thickness) could occupy a signiﬁcant volume in the pore throat.
                   Thus, there will be more cations than anions in the pore throat due to the presence of the EDL. After apply-
                   ing an external electric ﬁeld, the cations will carry more electrical current than anions (e.g., Butt et al., 2013),
                   and thus, the pore throat becomes a cation‐selective zone. Analytical equations fully considering the pore
                   geometry and EDL properties have been developed for the polarization of the capillary sequence model
                   (Bücker & Hördt, 2013a). There are also some simpliﬁed models by imposing special conditions (e.g.,
                   Bücker & Hördt, 2013b).
                   The abovementioned polarization models (sections 2.3.1 to 2.3.3) have been used to explain the
                   low‐frequency permittivity of many materials. For colloidal suspensions in electrolyte solutions (e.g.,
                   Arroyo et al., 1999), it is intuitive to apply the grain polarization model (Figure 1a) because the suspended
                   particles can be regarded as discrete grains as shown in Figure S1b. For granular materials such as sands
                   (e.g., Vaudelet et al., 2011) and glass beads packing (e.g., Leroy et al., 2008), it seems still reasonable to apply
                   the grain polarization model (Figure 1a), although the contacting particles in the granular materials are
                   incorrectly treated as isolated grains (Figure S1b). For porous rocks, it is however questionable to model
                   the continuous solid phase with isolated grains and to apply the grain polarization concept. Instead, the con-
                   cepts of pore polarization and membrane polarization seem more appealing because both of them can be
                   applied to a complex network model (e.g., Figure S1e), which is more realistic for representing the micro-
                   structure of porous geological media than the grain model. In addition, recently, the pore polarization con-
                   cept has gained much attention in estimating the effective pore size of porous rocks with induced
                   polarization measurements (e.g., Revil et al., 2015; Weller et al., 2016).


                   3. A General Framework for Pore‐Scale Modeling
                   In this section, we propose a general framework for pore‐scale numerical modeling of the effective electrical
                   conductivity and permittivity of porous geological materials (Figure 2). In particular, both electrochemical
                   polarizations and interfacial polarization are considered in the framework. To reduce the computational
                   burden, electrochemical polarizations are not modeled from ﬁrst principle simulations. Instead, the induced
                   complex conductance is calculated at the pore scale using the pore polarization (e.g., Figure 1b) and mem-
                   brane polarization (e.g., Figure 1c) models with the microstructure of the material simpliﬁed as a network of
                   capillary tubes connecting at spherical pore nodes (e.g., Figure S1e). The electrochemical polarizations‐
                   induced conductance is then upscaled to the water phase, and the governing equation for the electrical


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                     6 of 18
                                                                                                                                        21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                             10.1029/2020JB020515




                   Figure 2. The framework for pore‐scale numerical simulation of the broadband effective electrical conductivity and
                   permittivity of porous rocks used in this study.

                   conduction is solved in a representative elementary volume (REV) of the material. The REV contains the real
                   microstructure of the material so that the interfacial polarization can be reliably accounted for in the
                   simulation. The proposed framework is outlined in Figure 2, and the details are discussed as follows.
                   3.1. Determine Relevant Geometric Properties
                   The ﬁrst step in the framework is to determine relevant geometric properties of the materials by analyzing
                   the binary microstructural images. The properties of interest include porosity, surface area, pore (node) size
                   distribution, and pore throat size and/or length distribution. One of the purposes of this step is to validate the
                   image processing methods (e.g., noise reduction, smoothing, and segmentation; Andrä et al., 2013a) by com-
                   paring the calculated and experimental geometric properties. In addition, some geometric properties such as
                   pore size and pore throat length are critical in modeling the electrochemical polarizations in porous media,
                   and thus, these properties have to be determined for subsequent calculations.
                   While the bulk properties (e.g., porosity and surface area) are relatively easy to calculate (Zhan et al., 2010),
                   the determination of statistical properties such as pore/grain size distribution and pore throat size (or length)
                   distribution are not straightforward. In this study, we use the pore network extraction algorithms (e.g., Dong
                   & Blunt, 2009; Lindquist et al., 1996; Yi et al., 2017) to determine these properties. Experimental data such as
                   mercury injection porosimetry or gas adsorption data can also be used to estimate these statistical properties,
                   but additional assumptions may be involved, which may not be valid for materials with complex microstruc-
                   tures (e.g., Wardlaw & McKellar, 1981).
                   3.2. Calculate Electrochemical Polarization‐Induced Complex Conductance
                   The output of most electrochemical polarization models is a complex conductance C∗ = C′ − iC″ (in S; e.g.,
                   Schwarz, 1962), and it is only a perturbation caused by the polarization. If no polarization occurs, both the
                   real part C′ and imaginary part C″ of the complex conductance are zero. The imaginary part C″ measures the
                   polarizability of the material. The real part C′ is related to the displacement current resulting from the


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                   7 of 18
                                                                                                                                       21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                             10.1029/2020JB020515



                   polarization and vanishes if the frequency approaches to zero (i.e., dc condition). Thus, C′ should not be con-
                   fused with the surface conduction, which is induced by migration of excess ions in the EDL of the material
                   even at dc conditions.
                   As discussed, the pore space of the material is assumed as a network of capillary tubes (narrow pore throat)
                   connecting at some pore nodes (large pores). The elementary pore polarization model (Figure 1b) can be
                   applied to determine the polarization‐induced complex conductance C∗P (r) of individual pores (r being
                   the pore size). The individual contributions C ∗P (r) can then be convolved with the pore size distribution
                   f(r) to calculate the overall response C ∗P , expressed as (e.g., see Leroy et al., 2008; Lesmes & Morgan, 2001)

                                                                 C ∗P ¼ f ðr Þ⨂C∗p ðr Þ;                                         (9)

                   where ⨂ is the convolution product. Similarly, the elementary membrane polarization model (Figure 1c)
                   can be applied to determine the polarization‐induced complex conductance C ∗m (L) of individual pore
                   throats (L being a characteristic length of the pore throat). The individual contributions C ∗m (L) can then
                   be convolved with the distribution of the length, that is, f(L), to determine the overall response C∗M , that is,

                                                                C∗M ¼ f ðLÞ⨂C∗m ðLÞ:                                           (10)

                   The superposition of these two contributions gives a dispersed complex conductance C∗ for the electroche-
                   mical polarizations of the porous medium,

                                                                   C∗ ¼ C∗P þ C∗M :                                            (11)



                   3.3. Upscale Electrochemical Polarizations
                   In the models of pore and membrane polarizations, the induced dipole moments are within a pore node or
                   across a pore throat (Figures 1b and 1c). To include them in a pore‐scale simulation, we suggest to upscale
                   the electrochemical polarizations by converting the associated complex conductance, C∗ (in S), to a complex
                   conductivity Δσ ∗w (in S m−1), which will be added on the water phase. That is, the water phase will gain an
                   extra complex conductivity in addition to its intrinsic values. The conversion is expressed as (Niu &
                   Zhang, 2017)

                                                                               2C∗
                                                                     Δσ ∗w ¼       ;                                           (12)
                                                                                Λ

                   where Λ is the dynamic pore size proposed in Johnson et al. (1986). For pore space with some simple geo-
                   metries, the dynamic pore size Λ can be analytically determined. For example, if all the pores in the mate-
                   rials are spherical and identical, Λ is then equal to the radius of the pores. For complex microstructures,
                   however, Λ needs to be numerically determined based on the deﬁnition (Johnson et al., 1986),

                                                                  2 ∫ jEðxÞj2 dV
                                                                   ¼             ;                                             (13)
                                                                  Λ ∫ jEðxÞj2 dS

                   where E(x) is the local electric ﬁeld at location x, dV denotes the integration that is over the pore space,
                   and dS indicates the integration that is over the solid‐liquid interface. To calculate Λ, the local electric
                   ﬁeld E(x) needs to be determined by solving the Laplace equation.
                   In modeling the effective electrical properties of colloidal suspension and geological materials, it is very com-
                   mon to convert the surface electrochemical processes‐induced conductance (in S) to a volumetric conductiv-
                   ity (in S m−1). In general, there are two ways to upscale the surface conductance: particle upscaling and pore
                   upscaling (Niu & Zhang, 2017). The particle upscaling has been long used in modeling the low‐frequency
                   electrical properties of colloidal suspension (e.g., O'Konski, 1960; Schwarz, 1962), for which the grain polar-
                   ization can be safely applied because the induced dipole moment is across the particles. However, for porous
                   geological materials, the dipole moment induced by electrochemical polarizations is within pore nodes or
                   across pore throats, and hence, it is logical to use the pore upscaling, that is, Equation 12.


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                  8 of 18
                                                                                                                                                          21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                         Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                    10.1029/2020JB020515



                                                                      3.4. Pore‐Scale Numerical Simulation of the Effective Properties
                                                                      Nonmetallic minerals are usually nonconductive, and thus, the complex
                                                                      conductivity of the solid phase only has an imaginary component, that
                                                                      is, iωεs, where εs is the high‐frequency permittivity (or dielectric permittiv-
                                                                      ity) of the solid phase. The complex conductivity of the water has both real
                                                                      and imaginary components. While the real component is water conductiv-
                                                                      ity σw, the imaginary component is iωεw, where εw is the high‐frequency
                                                                      permittivity (or dielectric permittivity) of water. After upscaling the elec-
                                                                      trochemical polarizations, the water phase now has an apparent complex
                                                                      conductivity σ ∗w ,

                                                                                                   σ ∗w ¼ σ w þ iωεw þ Δσ ∗w :                    (14)

                                                                      The pore‐scale numerical simulation of the effective complex conductivity
                                                                      can be conducted by solving the Laplace equation in a REV of the sample,
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                  ∇ · Jt ¼ −∇ · σ ∗x ∇u ¼ 0;                      (15)

                                                                      where σ ∗x is the complex conductivity at the spatial location x within the
                                                                      material and u is the electrical potential at x. If x is located within the solid
                                                           3
Figure 3. A binary image of the Berea sandstone sample (350 voxels)   phase, σ ∗x ¼ iωεs ; otherwise, σ ∗x ¼ σ ∗w . In the simulation, an electrical
obtained from μCT scan images after segmentation. The size of each
                                                                      potential gradient is applied across the REV, and the spatial distributions
voxel is 2.8 × 2.8 × 2.8 μm.
                                                                      of u and Jt are determined numerically. The associated local electric ﬁeld
                                                                      E can also be determined accordingly. Then, the effective complex conduc-
                                                                      tivity of the sample σ ∗e f f can be determined as (Torquato, 2013)

                                                                                              < Jt >
                                                                                   σ ∗eff ¼          ;                                            (16)
                                                                                              <E>

                                    where <E> and <Jt> are the volume‐averaged electric ﬁeld and current density of the material, respectively.


                                    4. Application to Berea Sandstone
                                    In this study, we select a Berea sandstone sample to demonstrate the use of the proposed framework.
                                    Experiments were also conducted to measure the effective electrical conductivity and permittivity of the
                                    sample in the frequency range between 10−3 and 109 Hz. The details of the experiment and simulation
                                    are introduced in this section.

                                    4.1. Sample and Experiment
                                    The porosity ϕ of the Berea sandstone sample is 20.2%, and the speciﬁc surface area Sm is 0.5 m2 g−1 as deter-
                                    mined by nitrogen adsorption. Previous studies showed that the Berea sandstone is mainly made of quartz
                                    with a minor amount, less than 4% of clay minerals (e.g., Knight & Nur, 1987). The microstructure of the
                                    sample is shown in Figure 3 with a resolution of 2.8 μm, which are resampled from the μCT scan images
                                    of the sample after segmentation. The intrinsic formation factor F of the sample is 16.3 as determined by
                                    multisalinity electrical measurements (Revil et al., 2016).
                                    To determine the statistical properties of the microstructure, the pore space of the Berea sample is assumed
                                    as a lattice of pores connected by throats. Here, we use the algorithm developed by Dong and Blunt (2009) to
                                    extract the geometric characteristics from the binary images. The results include the pore size distribution
                                    (Figure 4a) and pore throat length distribution (Figure 4b). These statistical properties will be used later
                                    to calculate the complex conductance induced by electrochemical polarizations.
                                    The electrical properties of the sample, which was saturated by NaCl solution with σw = 0.043 S m−1, were
                                    measured with two different instruments. For frequencies lower than 10 kHz, the complex conductivity was
                                    measured by an impedance meter (PSIP, Ontash & Ermac, Inc., USA) with the four‐terminal method and
                                    Ag‐AgCl nonpolarizable electrodes. For the frequency ranging between 1 MHz and 1 GHz, the complex


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                     9 of 18
                                                                                                                                                           21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                            Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                        10.1029/2020JB020515




Figure 4. The geometric properties of the Berea sandstone sample: (a) pore node size distribution and (b) pore throat length distribution.

                                        permittivity was measured with a coaxial probe (N1501A‐101, Keysight, Inc., USA) and a network analyzer
                                        (E5071C, Keysight, Inc., USA). The experimental results are shown in Figure 5.
                                        4.2. Pore‐Scale Numerical Simulation
                                        The effective complex conductivity of the sample was also calculated by solving Equations 15 and 16. In the
                                        calculation, the binary microstructural images in Figure 3 were used, and the considered frequency range is
                                        between 10−3 and 109 Hz. The electrical conductivity and dielectric permittivity of the pore water is
                                        0.043 S m−1 and 80ε0 (ε0 being the vacuum permittivity 8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), respectively; the solid phase
                                        is nonconductive, and the dielectric permittivity is 7ε0. Both the pore polarization and membrane polariza-
                                        tion are considered in the calculation. For the pore polarization, Schwarz's (1962) model is used to calculate
                                        the polarization‐induced complex electrical conductance C∗P , expressed as

                                                                                                   iωτ p
                                                                                         C∗p ¼             ΣS ;                                     (17)
                                                                                                 1 þ iωτ p

                                        where ΣS (in S) is the surface conductance related to the EDL, and the relaxation time constant τp is
                                        expressed as

                                                                                                     r2
                                                                                              τp ¼      ;                                           (18)
                                                                                                     2D

                                        where D (in m2 s−1) is the diffusion coefﬁcient of the counterions in the EDL and r is the pore radius. Note
                                        that Equations 17 and 18 are modiﬁed from Schwarz (1962) by replacing the particle size a with the pore
                                        size r. In our simulation, ΣS is 1.3 × 10−9 S, which corresponds to a typical surface charge density of silica
                                        (0.025 C m−2) with Na+ mobility of 5.19 × 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1. The pore size distribution in Figure 4a is used
                                        to account for the contributions from all the pores (Equation 9).
                                        For membrane polarization, we use Titov's narrow pore throat model (Titov et al., 2002) to calculate the
                                        polarization‐induced complex conductance. The output of Titov's membrane polarization model is the com-
                                        plex resistance Z ∗m of the pore throat, expressed as (e.g., Bücker & Hördt, 2013b)
                                                                                                        pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                                                                 1 − exp −2 iωτ m
                                                                          Z ∗m ¼ Z dc 1 − η0 1 −        pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ     ;                           (19)
                                                                                                       2 iωτ m

                                        where Zdc is the dc resistance of the pore throat, η0 is the polarizability of the material, and the relaxation
                                        time constant τm is related to the pore throat length L by


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                      10 of 18
                                                                                                                                            21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                10.1029/2020JB020515




                   Figure 5. Measured electrical properties of the Berea sandstone sample: (a) complex effective conductivity measured by
                                                                                                                                    *
                   an impedance meter with four‐terminal method and Ag‐AgCl electrodes and (b) effective complex permittivity εd
                   measured with the coaxial probe and a network analyzer (ε0 being the vacuum permittivity).




                                                                               L2
                                                                        τm ¼      :                                                 (20)
                                                                               4D

                   For 1‐D system (e.g., Marshall & Madden, 1959), the unit of Z ∗m is Ωm2; for 3‐D system shown in Figure 1c, the
                   unit of Z ∗m is Ω (Bücker & Hördt, 2013b). Note that the complex conductance of the pore throat (i.e., 1/Zm∗)
                   also contains the dc component of the conductance of the pore throat 1/Zdc, which is not inﬂuenced by the
                   membrane polarization. To determine the membrane polarization‐induced complex conductance perturba-
                   tion C ∗m , this dc component needs to be subtracted, and thus, we have

                                                                  C∗m ¼ 1=Z ∗m − 1=Z dc :                                           (21)



NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                      11 of 18
                                                                                                                                                              21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                         Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                      10.1029/2020JB020515



Table 1                                                                   In our calculation, Zdc of the pore throat is calculated by considering the
Summary of Petrophysical Properties of the Berea Sandstone Sample and
                                                                          pore throat geometry (size and length) and the pore water conductivity.
Parameters Used in the Pore‐Scale Numerical Simulation
                                                                          The polarizability η0 used in the calculation is 1%, which is close to the
Petrophysical properties
                                                                          value (~0.6%) reported in Lesmes and Frye (2001). For each pore throat,
  Porosity (ϕ)                                            20.2%
  Speciﬁc surface area (Sm)
                                                             2 −1
                                                       0.5 m g            the relaxation time τm is calculated with Equation 21. Similarly, the con-
                                                              a           tributions of all pore throats are determined using Equation 10 by consid-
  Formation factor (F)                                    16.3
  Mean pore size (rm)                                    35 μm            ering the pore throat length distribution in Figure 4b. In the calculation,
Parameters used in the simulation
                                                              −9          the diffusion coefﬁcient of the counterion D was 1.3 × 10−9 m2 s−1, which
  Surface conductance contributing to the pore        1.3 × 10     S
                                                                          is consistent with the Na+ mobility 5.19 × 10−8 m2 V−1 s−1 if consider the
  polarization (ΣS)
                                                                 −1       Nernst‐Einstein equation.
  Water conductivity (σw)                             0.043 S m
                              +                            −9 2 −1
  Diffusion coefﬁcient of Na in EDL (D)            1.3 × 10 m s            The calculated complex conductance of pore and membrane polarizations
  Dynamic pore size (Λ)                                  2.7 μm
  Polarizability in modeling the membrane                  1%
                                                                           is superpositioned to form the electrochemical polarizations‐induced con-
  polarization (η0)                                                        ductance C∗ (Equation 11). Then, the conductance C∗ is converted to a
  Intrinsic permittivity of the solid phase (εs)                7ε0        volumetric electrical conductivity for the water phase, that is,
  Intrinsic permittivity of water (εw)                         80ε0        Equation 12. The dynamic pore size of the sample is 2.7 μm as determined
                                                           −12      −1
Note. The electrical permittivity of vacuum ε0 is 8.85 × 10    Fm .        from Equation 13. In this study, an industrial standard code (AC3D.F)
a
  From Revil et al. (2016).                                                developed at National Institute of Standards and Technology was modi-
                                                                           ﬁed to conduct the simulation. The code uses the ﬁnite‐difference method
                                         to solve the governing equation (Equation 15), and a total of 3503 voxels with the same size was used to
                                         approximate the REV in Figure 3. Table 1 summarizes the basic properties of the rock sample and para-
                                         meters used in the numerical simulation. We emphasize that the electrochemical polarization models used
                                         in the calculation are only for demonstration purpose. Other polarization models may also be used.


                                     5. Comparison of Experimental and Numerical Results
                                     5.1. Effective Electrical Conductivity
                                     The simulated and measured effective conductivity spectra of the sample are shown in Figure 6. For frequen-
                                     cies lower than 105 Hz, the measured effective conductivity is directly from the four‐terminal method
                                     (Figure 5a). In the frequency range between 1 MHz and 1 GHz, the effective conductivity measurements pre-
                                     sented in Figure 6 are calculated from the measured effective imaginary permittivity ε′′d in Figure 5b. In




                                     Figure 6. The simulated and measured effective conductivity σ′eff of the Berea sandstone sample in the frequency range
                                                −3       9
                                     between 10 and 10 Hz.


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                        12 of 18
                                                                                                                                          21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                               10.1029/2020JB020515



                   addition, because ε′′d only accounts for the relaxation losses, a dc conductivity σdc is also added, and thus, the
                   effective conductivity σ′eff is equal to σ dc þ ωε′′d (see Equation 7 and Topp et al., 1988). In this study, σdc is
                   equal to 0.0278 S m−1 as determined as the lowest measured effective real conductivity (Figure 5a).
                   A comparison of numerical and experimental results shows that the simulation captures the general trend of
                   the effective conductivity variations, especially for frequencies lower than 1 MHz. When the frequency is lar-
                   ger than 1 MHz, both simulated and measured values increase due to the interfacial polarization (will be dis-
                   cussed in section 5.3). However, the magnitude of the increase in the simulation is only ~0.001 S m−1, which
                   is much smaller than that in the experiment (~0.02 S m−1). This discrepancy might be due to fact that the
                   resolution of the digital microstructural μCT images (e.g., Figure 3) did not capture the nanometer‐scale het-
                   erogeneities at the solid‐liquid interface. Since the interfacial polarization is associated with electrical dis-
                   continuities, ignoring these nanometer‐scale discontinuities in the simulation underestimates the
                   relaxation losses and thus the effective electrical conductivity as shown in Figure 6.

                   5.2. Effective Electrical Permittivity
                   The simulated and measured effective electrical permittivity ε′eff of the sample is shown in Figure 7a. It is
                   observed that the effective permittivity varies over several orders as the frequency changes. At frequencies
                   between 108 and 109 Hz, the effective relative permittivity (i.e., ε′eff normalized by ε0) is nearly constant,
                   ~18 for the experiment and ~12 for the simulation. These effective permittivity values are very close to the
                   volume‐averaged permittivity of the individual phases, implying that no polarizations occur in this fre-
                   quency range. When the frequency is decreased to ~106 Hz, the experimental spectrum shows a clear
                   increase in effective permittivity (ε′eff/ε0 increased to ~45) due to the interfacial polarization (will be dis-
                   cussed in section 5.3). However, the increase in effective permittivity was not observed in numerical results.
                   As the frequency is further decreased (<105 Hz), the simulated and measured spectra agree well, and both of
                   them increase sharply due to the electrochemical polarizations (will be discussed in section 5.3). When the
                   frequency is lower than 0.1 Hz, large discrepancies are observed between experimental data and numerical
                   results.
                   The corresponding effective imaginary conductivity spectra are also plotted in Figure 7b. Note that the effec-
                   tive real permittivity ε′eff and effective imaginary conductivity σ″eff are related to each other by σ″eff = ωε′eff.
                   In a σ″eff − f log‐log plot, a constant permittivity is shown as a straight line with a slope of ω; an increase in
                   the permittivity is exhibited as a shift of the straight line toward the low‐frequency side. Our discussions on
                   the effective permittivity in Figure 7a also hold for the effective imaginary conductivity in Figure 7b.

                   5.3. Individual Contributions
                   To identify the relative contribution of individual polarizations, we also conducted simulations that only
                   consider one polarization at a time. In simulating the interfacial polarization, only the high‐frequency per-
                   mittivity (or dielectric permittivity) and dc conductivity are assigned to the solid and water phases. In simu-
                   lating the pore or membrane polarization, the complex conductivity of the water phase is σ w þ Δσ ∗w, in which
                   Δσ ∗w is converted from either C ∗P (pore polarization) or C∗M (membrane polarization); the complex conductiv-
                   ity of the solid phase is set as zero. Other parameters used in the simulations are identical to that in Table 1.
                   The calculated relative contributions of individual polarizations to the effective permittivity of the sample
                   are also shown in Figure 7.
                   The simulated effective permittivity due to the interfacial polarization (blue line in Figure 7a) is similar to
                   the experiment results, and both curves exhibit a high permittivity plateau (ε′eff/ε0 = ~40) at low frequencies
                   (<105 Hz) and a low effective permittivity (ε′eff/ε0 = ~20) at high frequencies (>108 Hz). The characteristic
                   frequency where the effective permittivity experiences a sharp change is, however, different, ~5 × 105 Hz
                   for the simulation and ~107 Hz for the experiment. One possible explanation of this discrepancy is that
                   the binary images used in the simulation have smoother solid‐liquid interfaces than the real sample, and
                   thus, interfacial polarizations associated with ﬁne‐scale heterogeneity could be overlooked in the simula-
                   tion. Thus, the characteristic frequency of the simulated spectrum shifts to the low‐frequency side as shown
                   in Figure 7.
                   The membrane polarization (red line in Figure 7) seems to affect the effective permittivity in a broad fre-
                   quency range, dominating around 103 Hz. If the membrane polarization is not accounted for, the


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                    13 of 18
                                                                                                                                                21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                   10.1029/2020JB020515




                   Figure 7. The simulated and measured (a) effective real permittivity and (b) effective imaginary conductivity of the Berea
                                                                        −3        9
                   sandstone sample in the frequency range between 10 and 10 Hz.




                   superposition of pore and interfacial polarization will signiﬁcantly underestimate the effective permittivity
                   at intermediate frequencies (e.g., from ~10 to ~104 Hz). The underestimation has been demonstrated in
                   some previous studies that did not consider the membrane polarization (e.g., Lesmes & Morgan, 2001). In
                   Figure 7, the simulated effective permittivity considering all polarizations agrees well at the intermediate
                   frequencies with the experimental curve. This implies that the membrane polarization could be a
                   signiﬁcant contributor to the effective permittivity of porous geological materials (e.g., Bücker &
                   Hördt, 2013b).
                   At low frequencies (<102 Hz), it appears that the pore polarization (green line in Figure 7) dominates over
                   other polarizations, and the effective permittivity increase is signiﬁcant. Comparing to experimental data,
                   the frequency range affected by the pore polarization is much narrower in the simulation. For frequencies
                   lower than 0.1 Hz, the simulated effective permittivity is considerably low. This could be because the


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                         14 of 18
                                                                                                                                       21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                             10.1029/2020JB020515



                   binary images used in the simulation only cover a small fraction of the sample (~1 mm3), and polarizations
                   occurring in larger pores may not be accounted for in the simulation.


                   5.4. Potential Applications
                   The proposed framework can be used to improve our understanding and modeling of the broadband effec-
                   tive electrical conductivity and permittivity of porous geological materials, which are essential in interpret-
                   ing ﬁeld geoelectrical measurements. In particular, the proposed framework is well suited for studying the
                   variation in effective electrical properties induced by various electrochemical processes occurring at the pore
                   or subpore scale. Also, because different models of electrochemical polarizations can be easily incorporated
                   in the simulation, it can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of existing models. One example is to compare
                   the individual contributions of the Stern‐layer polarization and diffuse‐layer polarization (e.g., Bücker et
                   al., 2019) in samples with realistic microstructures.
                   Another application of the proposed framework is to study the role of material microstructure in controlling
                   the effective electrical properties of geological materials. Recently, it becomes possible for pore‐scale numer-
                   ical simulations to include various geological processes, for example, compaction (Niu & Zhang, 2018a) and
                   mineral precipitation and dissolution (e.g., Miller et al., 2017; Niu & Zhang, 2019). Thus, realistic microstruc-
                   ture resulted from these geological processes can be effectively generated from numerical experiments.
                   Coupled with the proposed framework, the geoelectrical signatures of these geological processes can be
                   quantiﬁed and linked to the microstructural changes. In this regard, our work becomes an attractive way
                   to develop geological process‐based electrical models for porous media.



                   6. Conclusions
                   In this study, we developed a general framework for pore‐scale numerical simulations of the effective elec-
                   trical conductivity and permittivity of porous media in a broad frequency range. Both electrochemical polar-
                   izations and interfacial polarization are considered in our framework. To account for electrochemical
                   polarizations, the pore space of geological materials is assumed as a lattice of pore nodes connected by pore
                   throats. Then, the concepts of pore polarization and membrane polarization are respectively applied to the
                   pore nodes and pore throats so that the effects of electrochemical processes in the entire pore space can be
                   quantiﬁed. The electrochemical polarization‐induced complex conductance is then upscaled to the water
                   phase, which gains an extra volumetric complex conductivity in addition to its intrinsic value. The
                   pore‐scale numerical simulation can then be conducted on the digital microstructure of the material using
                   the apparent material properties. By doing so, both interfacial polarization (resulted from electrical discon-
                   tinuities) and electrochemical polarizations (due to the presence of the EDL) can be considered in a
                   pore‐scale simulation.
                   A Berea sandstone sample is utilized to demonstrate the use of the framework. A comparison of numerical
                   and experimental results shows that effective electrical conductivity and permittivity spectra in general agree
                   very well in the frequency between 10−3 and 109 Hz. At high frequencies (>105 Hz) where the interfacial
                   polarization dominates, both simulation and experiment show a clear increase in the effective permittivity
                   as the frequency decreases. However, the characteristic frequency, at which the effective permittivity experi-
                   ences a signiﬁcant change, is much lower in the simulation than that in the experiment. This discrepancy
                   can be explained by the fact that the microstructural images used in the simulation have smoother
                   solid‐liquid interfaces than the real sample. Thus, interfacial polarizations associated with ﬁne‐scale hetero-
                   geneity could be overlooked in the simulation.
                   At intermediate frequencies (e.g., from 102 to 105 Hz), the membrane polarization has a signiﬁcant contribu-
                   tion to the effective permittivity of the material. If overlooked, the simulated effective permittivity will be
                   much smaller than the measured values. For frequencies lower than 100 Hz, the pore polarization dominates
                   over other polarizations. It seems that the frequency range affected by the pore polarization in the simulation
                   is much narrower than that in the experiment. In particular, the simulated low‐frequency effective permit-
                   tivity (<0.1 Hz) is systemically low. This may be due to the use of a small sample volume (~1 mm3) in the
                   simulation that cannot consider the polarizations occurring in larger pores.


NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                 15 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                                              21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                                        10.1029/2020JB020515



                                          Data Availability Statement
                                          The data presented in this study can be downloaded online (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3908737).

Acknowledgments                           References
We thank Manju Murugesu (former           Andrä, H., Combaret, N., Dvorkin, J., Glatt, E., Han, J., Kabel, M., et al. (2013a). Digital rock physics benchmarks—Part I: Imaging and
undergraduate student at Colorado            segmentation. Computers & Geosciences, 50, 25–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2012.09.005
School of Mines) for the gas adsorption   Andrä, H., Combaret, N., Dvorkin, J., Glatt, E., Han, J., Kabel, M., et al. (2013b). Digital rock physics benchmarks—Part II: Computing
experiment and Mandy Schindler               effective properties. Computers & Geosciences, 50, 33–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2012.09.008
(former PhD student at Colorado           Annan, A. P. (2005). Ground‐penetrating radar. In Near‐surface geophysics (pp. 357–438). Tulsa, OK: Society of Exploration Geophysicists.
School of Mines) for the μCT image        Archie, G. E. (1942). The electrical resistivity log as an aid in determining some reservoir characteristics. Transactions of AIME, 146(01),
acquisition. We thank the editor Yves        54–62. https://doi.org/10.2118/942054‐G
Bernabé for handling our manuscript       Arroyo, F. J., Carrique, F., Bellini, T., & Delgado, A. V. (1999). Dielectric dispersion of colloidal suspensions in the presence of Stern
and two reviewers, Lee Slater and            layer conductance: Particle size effects. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 210(1), 194–199. https://doi.org/10.1006/
Damien Jougnot, for their valuable           jcis.1998.5914
comments, which have signiﬁcantly         Bairlein, K., Bücker, M., Hördt, A., & Hinze, B. (2016). Temperature dependence of spectral induced polarization data: Experimental results
improved the quality of a previous           and membrane polarization theory. Geophysical Journal International, 205(1), 440–453. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggw027
version of the manuscript.                Blunt, M. J., Bijeljic, B., Dong, H., Gharbi, O., Iglauer, S., Mostaghimi, P., et al. (2013). Pore‐scale imaging and modelling. Advances in Water
                                             Resources, 51, 197–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.03.003
                                          Bücker, M., Flores Orozco, A., Undorf, S., & Kemna, A. (2019). On the role of Stern‐ and diffuse‐layer polarization mechanisms in porous
                                             media. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124, 5656–5677. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JB017679
                                          Bücker, M., & Hördt, A. (2013a). Analytical modelling of membrane polarization with explicit parametrization of pore radii and the
                                             electrical double layer. Geophysical Journal International, 194(2), 804–813. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggt136
                                          Bücker, M., & Hördt, A. (2013b). Long and short narrow pore models for membrane polarization. Geophysics, 78(6), E299–E314. https://doi.
                                             org/10.1190/geo2012‐0548.1
                                          Bussian, A. E. (1983). Electrical conductance in a porous medium. Geophysics, 48(9), 1258–1268. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1441549
                                          Butt, H. J., Graf, K., & Kappl, M. (2013). Physics and chemistry of interfaces. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
                                          Chelidze, T. L., & Gueguen, Y. (1999). Electrical spectroscopy of porous rocks: A review—I. Theoretical models. Geophysical Journal
                                             International, 137(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365‐246x.1999.00799.x
                                          Chen, Y., & Or, D. (2006). Geometrical factors and interfacial processes affecting complex dielectric permittivity of partially saturated
                                             porous media. Water Resources Research, 42, W06423. https://doi.org/10.1029/2005WR004744
                                          Constable, S. (2010). Ten years of marine CSEM for hydrocarbon exploration. Geophysics, 75(5), 75A67–75A81. https://doi.org/10.1190/
                                             1.3483451
                                          Cosenza, P., Ghorbani, A., Revil, A., Zamora, M., Schmutz, M., Jougnot, D., & Florsch, N. (2008). A physical model of the low‐frequency
                                             electrical polarization of clay rocks. Journal of Geophysical Research, 113, B08204. https://doi.org/10.1029/2007JB005539
                                          Cundall, P. A., & Strack, O. D. (1979). A discrete numerical model for granular assemblies. Geotechnique, 29(1), 47–65. https://doi.org/
                                             10.1680/geot.1979.29.1.47
                                          de Lima, O. A., & Sharma, M. M. (1992). A generalized Maxwell‐Wagner theory for membrane polarization in shaly sands. Geophysics,
                                             57(3), 431–440. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1443257
                                          Dong, H., & Blunt, M. J. (2009). Pore‐network extraction from micro‐computerized‐tomography images. Physical Review E, 80(3), 036307.
                                          Dukhin, S. S., & Shilov, V. N. (1980). Kinetic aspects of electrochemistry of disperse systems. Part II. Induced dipole moment and the
                                             non‐equilibrium double layer of a colloid particle. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 13(1–2), 153–195.
                                          Fixman, M. (1980). Charged macromolecules in external ﬁelds. I. The sphere. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 72(9), 5177–5186. https://
                                             doi.org/10.1063/1.439753
                                          Han, T., & Yang, Y. S. (2018). Numerical and theoretical simulations of the dielectric properties of porous rocks. Journal of Applied
                                             Geophysics, 159, 186–192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2018.08.014
                                          Hanai, T. (1960). Theory of the dielectric dispersion due to the interfacial polarization and its application to emulsions. Kolloid Zeitschrift,
                                             171(1), 23–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01520320
                                          Hartkamp, R., Biance, A. L., Fu, L., Dufrêche, J. F., Bonhomme, O., & Joly, L. (2018). Measuring surface charge: Why experimental
                                             characterization and molecular modeling should be coupled. Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science, 37, 101–114. https://doi.org/
                                             10.1016/j.cocis.2018.08.001
                                          Johnson, D. L., Koplik, J., & Schwartz, L. M. (1986). New pore‐size parameter characterizing transport in porous media. Physical Review
                                             Letters, 57(20), 2564.
                                          Jones, S. B., & Friedman, S. P. (2000). Particle shape effects on the effective permittivity of anisotropic or isotropic media consisting of
                                             aligned or randomly oriented ellipsoidal particles. Water Resources Research, 36(10), 2821–2833. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000WR900198
                                          Jougnot, D., Ghorbani, A., Revil, A., Leroy, P., & Cosenza, P. (2010). Spectral induced polarization of partially saturated clay‐rocks: A
                                             mechanistic approach. Geophysical Journal International, 180(1), 210–224. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365‐246X.2009.04426.x
                                          Kemna, A., Binley, A., Cassiani, G., Niederleithinger, E., Revil, A., Slater, L., et al. (2012). An overview of the spectral induced polarization
                                             method for near‐surface applications. Near Surface Geophysics, 10(6), 453–468. https://doi.org/10.3997/1873‐0604.2012027
                                          Kneisel, C., Hauck, C., Fortier, R., & Moorman, B. (2008). Advances in geophysical methods for permafrost investigations. Permafrost and
                                             Periglacial Processes, 19(2), 157–178. https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp.616
                                          Knight, R. (2001). Ground penetrating radar for environmental applications. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 29(1),
                                             229–255. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.29.1.229
                                          Knight, R. J., & Nur, A. (1987). The dielectric constant of sandstones, 60 kHz to 4 MHz. Geophysics, 52(5), 644–654. https://doi.org/10.1190/
                                             1.1442332
                                          Kremer, F., & Schönhals, A. (2002). Broadband dielectric spectroscopy. New York: Springer Science & Business Media.
                                          Kuras, O., Beamish, D., Meldrum, P. I., & Ogilvy, R. D. (2006). Fundamentals of the capacitive resistivity technique. Geophysics, 71(3),
                                             G135–G152. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.2194892
                                          Leroy, P., Revil, A., Kemna, A., Cosenza, P., & Ghorbani, A. (2008). Complex conductivity of water‐saturated packs of glass beads. Journal
                                             of Colloid and Interface Science, 321(1), 103–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2007.12.031




NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                      16 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                        21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                                     10.1029/2020JB020515



                   Lesmes, D. P., & Friedman, S. P. (2005). Relationships between the electrical and hydrogeological properties of rocks and soils. In
                     Hydrogeophysics (pp. 87–128). Dordrecht: Springer.
                   Lesmes, D. P., & Frye, K. M. (2001). Inﬂuence of pore ﬂuid chemistry on the complex conductivity and induced polarization responses of
                     Berea sandstone. Journal of Geophysical Research, 106(B3), 4079–4090. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JB900392
                   Lesmes, D. P., & Morgan, F. D. (2001). Dielectric spectroscopy of sedimentary rocks. Journal of Geophysical Research, 106(B7),
                     13,329–13,346. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JB900402
                   Lindquist, W. B., Lee, S. M., Coker, D. A., Jones, K. W., & Spanne, P. (1996). Medial axis analysis of void structure in three‐
                     dimensional tomographic images of porous media. Journal of Geophysical Research, 101(B4), 8297–8310. https://doi.org/10.1029/
                     95JB03039
                   Loke, M. H., Chambers, J. E., Rucker, D. F., Kuras, O., & Wilkinson, P. B. (2013). Recent developments in the direct‐current geoelectrical
                     imaging method. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 95, 135–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2013.02.017
                   Lyklema, J., Dukhin, S. S., & Shilov, V. N. (1983). The relaxation of the double layer around colloidal particles and the low‐frequency
                     dielectric dispersion: Part I. Theoretical considerations. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry and Interfacial Electrochemistry, 143(1–2),
                     1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022‐0728(83)80251‐4
                   Marshall, D. J., & Madden, T. R. (1959). Induced polarization, a study of its causes. Geophysics, 24(4), 790–816. https://doi.org/10.1190/
                     1.1438659
                   McBride, M. B. (1989). Surface chemistry of soil minerals. In Minerals in soil environments (pp. 35–88). Madison, WI: Soil Science Society of
                     America.
                   Mendelson, K. S., & Cohen, M. H. (1982). The effect of grain anisotropy on the electrical properties of sedimentary rocks. Geophysics, 47(2),
                     257–263. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1441332
                   Miller, K., Vanorio, T., & Keehm, Y. (2017). Evolution of permeability and microstructure of tight carbonates due to numerical simulation
                     of calcite dissolution. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 122, 4460–4474. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JB013972
                   Milton, G. W., Eyre, D. J., & Mantese, J. V. (1997). Finite frequency range Kramers‐Kronig relations: Bounds on the dispersion. Physical
                     Review Letters, 79(16), 3062.
                   Niu, Q., Revil, A., Li, Z., & Wang, Y. H. (2017). Relationship between electrical conductivity anisotropy and fabric anisotropy in granular
                     materials during drained triaxial compressive tests: A numerical approach. Geophysical Journal International, 210(1), 1–17. https://doi.
                     org/10.1093/gji/ggx140
                   Niu, Q., & Zhang, C. (2017). Pore‐scale modelling of complex conductivity of saturated granular materials. Near Surface Geophysics, 15(6),
                     593–602. https://doi.org/10.3997/1873‐0604.2017055
                   Niu, Q., & Zhang, C. (2018a). Physical explanation of Archie's porosity exponent in granular materials: A process‐based, pore‐scale
                     numerical study. Geophysical Research Letters, 45, 1870–1877. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GL076751
                   Niu, Q., & Zhang, C. (2018b). Joint inversion of NMR and SIP data to estimate pore size distribution of geomaterials. Geophysical Journal
                     International, 212(3), 1791–1805. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggx501
                   Niu, Q., & Zhang, C. (2019). Permeability prediction in rocks experiencing mineral precipitation and dissolution: A numerical study. Water
                     Resources Research, 55, 3107–3121. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018WR024174
                   O'Konski, C. T. (1960). Electric properties of macromolecules. V. Theory of ionic polarization in polyelectrolytes. The Journal of Physical
                     Chemistry, 64(5), 605–619.
                   Olhoeft, G. R. (1985). Low‐frequency electrical properties. Geophysics, 50(12), 2492–2503. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1441880
                   Revil, A. (2012). Spectral induced polarization of shaly sands: Inﬂuence of the electrical double layer. Water Resources Research, 48,
                     W02517. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011WR011260
                   Revil, A. (2013). Effective conductivity and permittivity of unsaturated porous materials in the frequency range 1 mHz–1 GHz. Water
                     Resources Research, 49, 306–327. https://doi.org/10.1029/2012WR012700
                   Revil, A., Binley, A., Mejus, L., & Kessouri, P. (2015). Predicting permeability from the characteristic relaxation time and intrinsic forma-
                     tion factor of complex conductivity spectra. Water Resources Research, 51, 6672–6700. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017074
                   Revil, A., & Glover, P. W. J. (1998). Nature of surface electrical conductivity in natural sands, sandstones, and clays. Geophysical Research
                     Letters, 25(5), 691–694. https://doi.org/10.1029/98GL00296
                   Revil, A., Karaoulis, M., Johnson, T., & Kemna, A. (2012). Some low‐frequency electrical methods for subsurface characterization and
                     monitoring in hydrogeology. Hydrogeology Journal, 20(4), 617–658. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10040‐011‐0819‐x
                   Revil, A., Kessouri, P., & Torres‐Verdín, C. (2014). Electrical conductivity, induced polarization, and permeability of the Fontainebleau
                     sandstone. Geophysics, 79(5), D301–D318. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2014‐0036.1
                   Revil, A., Koch, K., & Holliger, K. (2012). Is it the grain size or the characteristic pore size that controls the induced polarization relaxation
                     time of clean sands and sandstones? Water Resources Research, 48, W05602. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011WR011561
                   Revil, A., Meyer, C. D., & Niu, Q. (2016). A laboratory investigation of the thermoelectric effect. Geophysics, 81(4), E243–E257. https://doi.
                     org/10.1190/geo2015‐0281.1
                   Rhoades, J. D., Raats, P. A. C., & Prather, R. J. (1976). Effects of liquid‐phase electrical conductivity, water content, and surface conductivity
                     on bulk soil electrical conductivity. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 40(5), 651–655. https://doi.org/10.2136/
                     sssaj1976.03615995004000050017x
                   Samet, M., Levchenko, V., Boiteux, G., Seytre, G., Kallel, A., & Serghei, A. (2015). Electrode polarization vs. Maxwell‐Wagner‐Sillars
                     interfacial polarization in dielectric spectra of materials: Characteristic frequencies and scaling laws. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
                     142(19), 194703.
                   Santamarina, J. C., Klein, K. A., & Fam, M. A. (2001). Soils and waves. New York: J. Wiley & Sons.
                   Schwarz, G. (1962). A theory of the low‐frequency dielectric dispersion of colloidal particles in electrolyte solution. The Journal of Physical
                     Chemistry, 66(12), 2636–2642. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100818a067
                   Scott, J. B., & Barker, R. D. (2003). Determining pore‐throat size in Permo‐Triassic sandstones from low‐frequency electrical spectroscopy.
                     Geophysical Research Letters, 30(9), 1450. https://doi.org/10.1029/2003GL016951
                   Sen, P. N., Scala, C., & Cohen, M. H. (1981). A self‐similar model for sedimentary rocks with application to the dielectric constant of fused
                     glass beads. Geophysics, 46(5), 781–795. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1441215
                   Sheng, P. (1990). Effective‐medium theory of sedimentary rocks. Physical Review B, 41(7), 4507. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.41.4507
                   Sheng, P., & Callegari, A. J. (1984). Differential effective medium theory of sedimentary rocks. Applied Physics Letters, 44(8), 738–740.
                     https://doi.org/10.1063/1.94900




NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                                17 of 18
                                                                                                                                                                      21699356, 2020, 10, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JB020515 by CochraneAustria, Wiley Online Library on [27/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
             Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth                                                                   10.1029/2020JB020515



                   Shilov, V. N., Delgado, A. V., Gonzalez‐Caballero, F., & Grosse, C. (2001). Thin double layer theory of the wide‐frequency range dielectric
                      dispersion of suspensions of non‐conducting spherical particles including surface conductivity of the stagnant layer. Colloids and
                      Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 192(1–3), 253–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927‐7757(01)00729‐4
                   Streich, R. (2016). Controlled‐source electromagnetic approaches for hydrocarbon exploration and monitoring on land. Surveys in
                      Geophysics, 37(1), 47–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10712‐015‐9336‐0
                   Telford, W. M., Geldart, L. P., Sheriff, R. E., & Sheriff, R. E. (1990). Applied geophysics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.
                      org/10.1017/CBO9781139167932
                   Titov, K., Komarov, V., Tarasov, V., & Levitski, A. (2002). Theoretical and experimental study of time domain‐induced polarization in
                      water‐saturated sands. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 50(4), 417–433. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926‐9851(02)00168‐4
                   Topp, G. C., Davis, J. L., & Annan, A. P. (1980). Electromagnetic determination of soil water content: Measurements in coaxial transmission
                      lines. Water Resources Research, 16(3), 574–582. https://doi.org/10.1029/WR016i003p00574
                   Topp, G. C., Yanuka, M., Zebchuk, W. D., & Zegelin, S. (1988). Determination of electrical conductivity using time domain reﬂectometry:
                      Soil and water experiments in coaxial lines. Water Resources Research, 24(7), 945–952. https://doi.org/10.1029/WR024i007p00945
                   Torquato, S. (2013). Random heterogeneous materials: Microstructure and macroscopic properties (Vol. 16). New York: Springer Science &
                      Business Media.
                   Toumelin, E., & Torres‐Verdín, C. (2007). 2D pore‐scale simulation of wide‐band electromagnetic dispersion of saturated rocks. Geophysics,
                      72(3), F97–F110. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.2561301
                   Unsworth, M., Wenbo, W., Jones, A. G., Li, S., Bedrosian, P., Booker, J., et al. (2004). Crustal and upper mantle structure of northern Tibet
                      imaged with magnetotelluric data. Journal of Geophysical Research, 109, B02403. https://doi.org/10.1029/2002JB002305
                   Vaudelet, P., Revil, A., Schmutz, M., Franceschi, M., & Bégassat, P. (2011). Changes in induced polarization associated with the sorption of
                      sodium, lead, and zinc on silica sands. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 360(2), 739–752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2011.04.077
                   Volkmann, J., & Klitzsch, N. (2015). Wideband impedance spectroscopy from 1 mHz to 10 MHz by combination of four‐ and two‐electrode
                      methods. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 114, 191–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2015.01.012
                   Wardlaw, N. C., & McKellar, M. (1981). Mercury porosimetry and the interpretation of pore geometry in sedimentary rocks and artiﬁcial
                      models. Powder Technology, 29(1), 127–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032‐5910(81)85011‐5
                   Weller, A., & Slater, L. (2012). Salinity dependence of complex conductivity of unconsolidated and consolidated materials: Comparisons
                      with electrical double layer models. Geophysics, 77(5), D185–D198. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2012‐0030.1
                   Weller, A., Zhang, Z., Slater, L., Kruschwitz, S., & Halisch, M. (2016). Induced polarization and pore radius—A discussion. Geophysics,
                      81(5), D519–D526. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2016‐0135.1
                   Yi, Z., Lin, M., Jiang, W., Zhang, Z., Li, H., & Gao, J. (2017). Pore network extraction from pore space images of various porous media
                      systems. Water Resources Research, 53, 3424–3445. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016WR019272
                   Zhan, X., Schwartz, L. M., Toksöz, M. N., Smith, W. C., & Morgan, F. D. (2010). Pore‐scale modeling of electrical and ﬂuid transport in
                      Berea sandstone. Geophysics, 75(5), F135–F142. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.3463704
                   Zhuravlev, L. T. (2000). The surface chemistry of amorphous silica. Zhuravlev model. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and
                      Engineering Aspects, 173(1–3), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927‐7757(00)00556‐2




NIU ET AL.                                                                                                                                              18 of 18
